# LedgerTemplate

My [Beancount](https://github.com/beancount/beancount) ledger template, including python scripts for bank, wechat and alipay bills processing, market price getting for Chinese stock.

## Generate beans

```sh
cd importer
python ./bank_cmb.py ../data/2024/CMB_6214--------5189_20240101_20240131.csv
python ./wechat.py '../data/2024/微信支付账单(20240101-20240131).csv'
python ./alipay.py ../data/2024/alipay_record_202401.csv
```

## Get market price

```sh
cd importer
python ./price_gen.py
```

## Editor

VS Code is my recommended editor. It can provide Beancount syntax highlighting and alignment, Git management, Python development environment and so on.

The [Beancount](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Lencerf.beancount) extension for VS Code is necessary for highlighting and alignment.

Set `beancount.separatorColumn` to **61**. After that, the Beancount files generated by Python in the above steps can be automatically aligned by right - clicking and selecting "Format Document".

The [Beancount Formatter](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dongfg.vscode-beancount-formatter) extension is also recommended for alignment.

Set `beancountFormatter.currencyColumn` to **65**.

The [Beancount](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Lencerf.beancount) extension can also highlight the bugs in the ledger.

Set `beancount.mainBeanFile` to `main.bean`, `beancount.python3Path` to `python` (or your specific path. make sure python3 is installed).

## My learning and doing experience

### Step 0: first try

* Read blogs about Beancount

* Install beancount and try to run fava on example file

* Create main.bean, and try to log transactions manually

### Step 1: set up 1st month

* Create Git repo to track modifications and sync accross devices

* Create accounts (income, expense, assets, liabilities and equity)

* Generate transactions of last month (get income statements draft version)

  * python scripts: 招商银行 bank_cmb.py, 工商银行 bank_icbc.py, 支付宝 alipay.py, 微信 wechat.py

* Check the beans manually (get income statements)

* Add balance assertions of assets and liabilities (get balance sheet)

### Step 2: update a new month (or history months)

* Generate new transactions

* Check manually

* Add new balance assertions

### Step 3: trade with beancount

* Generate detailed trade transcations

  * python scripts: 东方财富证券 eastmoney.py, 银河证券 galaxy.py, 光大证券 everbright.py, 天天基金 fund_tiantian.py

* Generate market price automatically

  * python scripts: price_gen.py

* Add balance assertion of the cash of trade accounts

### Step 4: try more data analysis

* use [fava-dashboards](https://github.com/andreasgerstmayr/fava-dashboards), in order to make the figures get correct data:

  * modify the example code or modify your beancount accounts name

  * add commodity.bean

### Step 5: family ledger

* set up 2 ledgers

* set up a new ledegr in the parent directory to include the 2 ledgers

## Family Ledger account naming

YOU: YY
MATE: XX

in order to make balance assertion work, you may need to add name in your account to distinguish the same assert name.

```
; accounts of YY
2000-01-01 open Assets:Cash:Operating:Paper:YY              ; 纸币

; accounts of XX
2000-01-01 open Assets:Cash:Operating:Paper:XX              ; 纸币
```

## HostedBeans

You can also put your ledegr in [HostedBeans](https://www.hostedbeans.io/) to view your ledger in any time anywhere.
